# Game Design: Reducing Victory Points

In many games played by humans, it is an interesting mechanic to allow the player to reduce their own victory points.  The most obvious example is any game where the objective is to have the most money at the end of the game, but you can spend money to buy things while playing.  This leads to the interesting game dynamic of calculating if the current cost will result in a net gain before the game ends.  The primary problem for AI games is the advantage of inaction.

Its pretty obvious that on the last turn I shouldn't spend money unless it creates a net gain on that turn.  A good AI (or with simple enough mechanics a passable AI) can predict earlier and earlier when there is no way for an action to be useful.  Similarly its possible to realize your opponent cannot gain enough money to surpass you as long as you don't spend any more yourself.  This can lead to some really boring ends of games, where both players stop doing anything because all they can do is wait for their opponent to mistakenly act.  Note that in these games you cannot [end the game early](early-game-over.md) because its always possible someone will buy something incorrectly.  As such, these games can lead to the winner being decided a long time before the game ends.

On the other side of the skill level, we have the Piracy problem. In MegaMinerAI 7: Piracy whichever player had the most gold at the end won.  The problem was that due to the difficultly most players had in earning gold, many of them had less at the end of the game than they started with.  This lead to the embarrassing outcome that approximately half of the **final** submissions lost to an AI that performed no action at all.
This illustrates the problem "spending money to make money" can have on low skill AI development.  It can take a team a significant amount of work to outperform doing nothing at all, discouraging early development.