# Game Design: Theme

For competitors, the most important aspect of the game (after technical soundness) seems to be game theme.  The canonical example is MegaMinerAI 7: Piracy.  This game was from a mechanic perspective a failure.  The advanced strategies were too difficult for any team to successfully perform.  Many teams lost to a blank AI since they were unable to recover more money then they spent on units.  The winning strategy completely ignored the actions of their opponent, and would be trivial to counter hand teams actually been able to get their units to their opponents island.  After the tournament was over the development team felt terrible, suggesting this may have been one of the worst games we ever produced.

Yet at the postmortem competitors gave us a completely different opinion.  While they didn't get anywhere, they had a lot of fun doing it.  The notion of controlling a pirate horde, stealing ships and collecting booty was just fun.  The visualizer played well into making the game look interesting.  Competitors reported they were never lost for what to do, and understood the game quickly.

Theme helps get competitors involved.  Consider a game to write an AI for Checkers.  Most people aren't that interested in spending 24 hours trying to do that.  Lets try and repackage Checkers by changing the name and putting story behind its rules.  Lets call it Samurai, where you guide elite swordsman in their battle against their ancient enemy, attacking by cutting right through them.  Any Samurai who reaches their enemy's homeland become grand masters, able to defy the laws of battle, moving and attacking in any direction.  Same game, but far more appeal.

Theme helps make game mechanics intuitive.  Consider this game.  You have a bunch of circles that move around.  Some circles can do different things.  Some circles can perform actions which reduce the stats of other circles, potentially causing those circles to be deleted.  Other circles can create circles, where these circles can't move or perform any actions, but if some other circles get to close to the new circles they can die.  Unless the new circles can't see the other circles because they are invisible.

Lets try again, but with theme.  The game is Space.  You have a bunch of ships that move around in space.  There are different types of ship, each with their own special powers.  Fighters can attack and kill other ships.  Mine Layer's can drop proximity mines, which explode and damage any opponent ship that gets to close.  Note: mine's are not able to detect cloaked ships.
